# Traditional, a New Magic: The Gathering Constructed Format<br><sub>[[home](https://traditionalmtg.github.io)][[discord](https://discordapp.com/invite/DGBwDRq)]</sub>

## Part I: An Introduction

Derived from Modern and conceived in the wake of the turbulent events of
*Hogaak* Summer, *Urza* Autumn, *Oko* Winter, and Companion Spring, Traditional
is a community-run constructed format that seeks to explore a more traditional
style of Magic, where games are not dominated by Planeswalkers and "pushed"
mythic rares. To this end, the initial ruleset is simple and straightforward:
the standard Modern game rules, cardpool, and banlist are used, but
Planeswalkers, cards printed only at mythic rarity, and the Companion mechanic
are removed. The result is a refreshing respite from what Magic has become in
recent years.

### Why Not Planeswalkers and Mythics

At over 13000 cards, the Modern cardpool is extremely deep. Yet decklists are
increasingly dominated by cards and mechanics from recent sets, with many decks
looking more like Standard decks with fetchlands and a few older removal spells
thrown in, than decks built with cards from almost two decades of sets. Much of
this can be attributed to the power creep associated with Wizards of the
Coast's new F.I.R.E design philosophy, but the effects have not been evenly
distributed across card types and rarities.

In particular, the power level of Planeswalkers has increased sharply in recent
years with all-time design mistakes like *Jace, the Mind Sculptor* matched or
even surpassed by new all-time design mistakes like *Oko, Thief of Crowds*,
*Karn, the Great Creator*, *Teferi, Time Raveler*, and *Narset, Parter of
Veils* (although she mostly affects Vintage and Legacy) while the Planeswalker
card type remains difficult to profitably interact with. *Oko* was simply a
case of pushing way too hard with not enough testing, but *Karn*, *Teferi*, and
*Narset* are emblematic of negative trends in Magic design with their one-sided
static abilities which uninterestingly remove the ability of just one of the
players to do something. The former even caused Wizards to ban an utterly
inoffensive card in *Mycosynth Lattice* in Modern due to their unstated policy
of not banning expensive new cards superseding their long time stated policy of
banning the enabler, not the payoff.

Mythic rarity has had a similarly negative effect on constructed Magic. It was
originally stated that the rarity would be reserved for "Planeswalkers, most
legends, and epic-feeling creatures and spells" rather than "utility
cards...cards that fill a universal function" and while Shards of Alara—the set
that introduced mythic rarity—did only feature such cards, within a few sets
this principle was abandoned as tournament staples which were highly sought
after but don't "feel epic" like *Lotus Cobra*, *Brazen Borrower*, and
(counting upshifts) *Tarmogoyf* were printed at mythic. Today, the rarity
largely feels like a dumping ground for highly pushed cards so they can command
high prices while not ruining limited formats too badly. Indeed, the removal of
mythics makes traditional decks significantly less expensive than their Modern
counterparts, an effect compounded by the fact that metagames are increasingly
warped around the mythic du jour as Wizards continues to push and push meaning
that must-have mythics have their price temporarily inflated by their legality
in Standard. For example, many Modern decks contain the full playset of *Uro,
Titan of Nature's Wrath* which would have cost you a frankly silly $280 for
four pieces of cardboard at its peak. To add insult to injury, you would have
already lost $100 of value at the time of writing due to the impending Standard
rotation with more losses to come when it actually arrives.

The rationale behind the removal of the Companion rule requires no explanation.
Do note that it is perfectly legal to play Companions as normal creatures in
your deck.

### What We Get in Exchange

With Planeswalkers and mythics removed from the cardpool, the set of viable
cards actually ends up increasing significantly. This might be a bit
counterintuitive, but consider the effect on the deckbuilding process when a
small number of cards are clearly much better than all of the others in each of
their respective classes. For example, *Wurmcoil Engine* is the obvious first
choice for a 6-drop artifact creature in Modern, providing resilience against
many forms of removal as well as excellent defensive and offensive
capabilities. In Traditional, no such no-compromise creature exists, forcing
deckbuilers to weigh the relative merits of options like *Scuttling Doom
Engine*, *Steel Hellkite*, and *Myr Battlesphere*. Similarly, *Jace* is the
obvious card advantage engine for Modern blue midrange and control decks while
Traditional blue decks have found success with an array of draw spells
including *Fact or Fiction*, *Thirst for Meaning*, and *Gifts Ungiven*. Control
win conditions are also more diverse due to the removal of *Jace* and *Uro*,
two cards that have completely homogenized the role in Modern by also being
card advantage engines plus tempo and ramp plays respectively, with *Dream
Trawler*, *Scapeshift*, and even *Yidaro, Wandering Monster* all performing
well.

To be sure, the Traditional metagame is still in its early stages of
development but so far it shown itself to be much healthier and more varied
than Modern's. At the time of writing UGx snow piles and Gruul *Utopia Sprawl*
midrange are arguably the top two archetypes in Modern and while they lose
critical cards in *Uro*, *Klothys, God of Destiny*, and all of their
planeswalkers, both remain in the top tier of Traditional with undefeated runs
in the weekly community tournament. However, a large number of strategies that
have been relegated to a distant tier 2 in Modern like merfolk, the
aforementioned old school *Cryptic*-*Scapeshift*, and *Martyr*-*Proc*
(featuring maindeck *Lurrus of the Dream-Den*) are now competitive with these
decks. A large number of new brews have emerged as well, with players
experimenting with different Tron builds including mono-black and even one
which plays *Siege Rhino*, a variety of black-centric zombie and devotion
decks, storm builds with *Pyromancer Ascension* and *Aria of Flame*, and many
more.

### Take the Tradpill Today

For years Modern was known as a format where a diverse array of tier 1, tier
1.5, and tier 2 strategies could all find success but the accelerating power
creep of recent releases has allowed the top strategies to pull far ahead,
leaving only an enormous gap between the first and second tiers. At the same
time, contemporary Magic gameplay is often the least enjoyable it has ever
been, with Planeswalkers, pushed mythics, and Companions creating games which
are frequently uninteractive, one-sided, and homogeneous. Traditional rights
these wrongs by striking the problem at its core, removing entire categories of
design mistakes and returning Magic to the amazing game it once was.

[Reject Modernity, embrace Tradition!](https://discordapp.com/invite/DGBwDRq)

#### Postscript

Although the Traditional community is currently focused on a Modern-based
format, the simple ruleset of removing Planeswalkers, mythics, and the
Companion mechanic can be applied to almost any format with great effect.
Standard, Pioneer, Legacy, and Vintage have all been roiled by the trio in
recent years much in the same way as Modern. Many excellent cubes are already
Traditional or close and Commander, where the Companion mechanic is simply
inelegant, is likely a very interesting place to try the rules as well. Last
but not least, traditional Pauper is the ultimate hedge against War of the
Spark II where Wizards prints their next beautiful Planeswalker mistake at
common.
